hey this is presto Walker and you're
watching mind your decisions here's a
really neat problem from a German math
competition start out with triangle ABC
and it's inscribed circle will draw a
tangent to this inscribed circle and
label its points D and E the diagram is
not to scale in triangle ABC a B is
equal to 3 bc is equal to 5 and CA is
equal to 6 de is tangent to the in
circle or inscribed circle of the
triangle ABC what is the perimeter of
triangle c de again this comes from a
German math competition known as the
kangaroo dermatome attic you had to
solve 30 problems in 90 minutes with no
calculator can you figure it out
give this problem a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for a
solution before I explain the solution I
want to go over a key geometric
principle segments tangent to a circle
from an exterior point are equal so
consider a circle and we'll take an
exterior point a well draw a tangent to
the circle at point B and we'll draw
another tangent to the circle and label
that point C we want to prove that the
length of a B is equal to the length AC
how do we do that well because the line
segments are tangent to the circle we
can draw radii each with the length of
the radius of the circle R that form
right angles at points B and C so here's
a right angle at point B and we can do
the same thing to Point C
and each of these segments have lengths
are because they are radii of the same
circle now we'll connect a to the circle
Center with length W because we have
right triangles we can use the
Pythagorean theorem we can calculate
that a B is equal to the square root of
W squared minus R squared and AC has the
same length
thus a B is equal to AC so we're gonna
use this principle many times to solve
this problem so how can we figure out
the perimeter of triangle C de well
let's look at the pertinent parts of the
question and now let's think about what
we need to solve for let's suppose this
tangent point is labeled f this tangent
point is labeled G and the tangent point
between de and the in circle is J now
suppose a J is equal to X by the
principle of equal tangents GE is also
equal to X suppose the DJ is equal to Y
by the principle of equal tangents DF is
also equal to Y so if we want to
calculate the perimeter of triangle CDE
this will be C D plus C E Plus the
length of de this will be equal to CD
plus y plus c e plus X but we know that
CF is equal to CD plus y and cg is equal
to c e plus X so we can substitute these
in to get that the perimeter is equal to
CF plus ze + X which then simplifies to
be CF plus C G we can make one more
simplification in particular C F is
equal to CG because of the principle of
equal tangents therefore the perimeter
of triangle CDE is equal to 2 times CF
so this is one way
see that the perimeter of the triangle
is equal to two times CF but there's
another way that you could come to this
conclusion so let's go back to our
original diagram now let's imagine that
we move this line de so that it's still
tangent to the in circle but it's never
specified where this line has to be so
let's try and get a limiting case
imagine that we move e towards C now
according to problem this triangle will
still have the same perimeter and we can
continue to move towards C and in the
very limiting case we get e is exactly
equal to C and then C D becomes a
tangent to the in circle so if we label
this tangent point as f we have the D
and F are coincident so since C E is
equal to zero the perimeter of this
triangle C D plus de plus C e is equal
to CF plus C F which is equal to two
times C F so this is an alternate way to
see the perimeter of triangle CDE is
also equal to two times C F now how can
we solve for two times C F well let's
let C F be equal to P over 2 this is
because it's the perimeter over to now
let's label our tangent points of the in
circle as G and H and now what can we do
from here well by the principle of equal
tangents see G will also be equal to P
over 2 next since BC is equal to 5 B G
will be equal to 5 minus P over 2 then
we use the principle of equal tangents
to get the B G and B H R equal to 5
minus P over 2 we then use that a b is
equal to 3 so we get that a H is equal
to P over 2 minus 2 then we use the
principle of equal tangents
to get the a F is also equal to Pete
over to minus two finally we have that
CA is equal to six but we have another
expression for C a and that's equal to P
over 2 minus 2 plus P over 2 so we can
solve this equation that P is equal to 8
and that's exactly the perimeter of
triangle CDE by walking around this
triangle using the principle of equal
tangents we figured out the perimeter of
triangle CDE did you figure it out
thanks for watching this video these
math videos inspire and build confidence
for people around the world and they've
already gained over a hundred million
views
I think this goal merits millions of
subscribers and billions of views please
help make this possible subscribe for
free to get the newest videos watch and
share all of mind your decisions videos
and email me a math topic or puzzle
suggestion at presh and mind your
decisions comm if you like this video
you can check out my books which are
listed in the video description and if
you so choose
you can financially support this cause
on patreon to earn exclusive rewards
thanks for watching and thanks for your
support